>> Mathew DesLauriers: So hello.
Welcome to creative coding.
My name is Matt.
I'm a creative coder and a generative
artist, living in London right now, but
I'm from Canada.
And yeah, I'm really excited to
be here giving this workshop.
So just a bit about what
we're gonna be doing.
Today is about creative coding, but
also it's about generative art, and
we're gonna get into what that is but
it's a passion of mine.
And it's how I thought could
be interesting to make
this workshop all about generative art,
and creative coding both together.
The idea of this workshop is that
it's designed for beginners but
also if you're experienced,
even if you do this for
living, you should hopefully
gain a lot of the process and
workflow that I've been building myself
for the last two years basically.
And if we're gonna talk about these
tools and what kind of tools we can use
to really create high quality,
production ready generative art or
creative code for whatever the application
is that we wanna talk about.
In the morning,
it's gonna be more around 2D, [COUGH] and
more about creating print artworks.
And then in the afternoon,
we're gonna be talking more
about 3GS, WebGL, 3D, and
more [INAUDIBLE] stuff.
So I keep saying generative art and
I keep saying creative coding,
I just wanna give us a sense
of what those things are.
So creative coding is
a really broad term and
it's basically just using code to create
something expressive, artistic, or
creative really,
rather than just functional.
And so that's really broad, it compasses a
whole bunch of different types of fields.
And really today we are gonna focus
more on the web and focus more on
how do we use this kind of expressive
stuff to create web experiences or
experiences that can be created with
web technology, like a print artwork or
an animation or a video or
something like that.
And then generative art, this is
just how I wanted to look at today.
It's sort of a subset of creative coding,
and
it's creating artworks with an emergent
system or autonomous system.
A system that sort of acts on its own, and
so as the artist, you're not just creating
the art yourself but you're also sort of
dancing and playing with this machine.
And the machine is creating
the art as well as you are.
So you sort of feed these instructions or
rules to a machine,
and it goes on its own and creates
the artwork, along with your own input.
And so
before we get into coding things, and
before we get into actually
doing some exercises and
stuff like that, just wanted to run
through a few examples that inspired me.
Some different artworks and some different
projects, and hopefully it will give you
a better sense of all the different types
of things you can do with creative code.
So this one is an app that
I thought was really cool.
It's by Zach Lieberman and Zach Lieberman
is definitely somebody worth checking out.
He does a lot of really cool,
creative code projects.
He's a co-founder of open frameworks
which is a library for creative coding.
And he's also a co-founder for the school
for poetic computation in New York which
is a school that really focuses on
creative computing and creative coding.
And he created this app that's an
augmented reality app where you just sort
of play with typography in weird and
funky ways.
You can share videos, you can share
images, and so on and so forth.
And I think this is a really good example,
the kind of stuff you can do if you,
after maybe today,
we'll start to know a bit more about 3D
and about shaders and things like that.
And those kind of concepts,
even though we're gonna be looking
at it through a generative art,
they can be applied to create something
like this, which is like a little for fun.
But then,
also there's other artists that are
working more in traditional sort of sense.
In the sense that they're creating
art that you hang on a wall, or
something like that.
And they're still creating it with code.
So this is Anders Hoff also
known as inconvergent, and
he creates these very complex emergent
systems that sometimes simulate
nature like differential growth or
something like that.
And then he quite often sends
the output of these programs.
He sends these to
a mechanical pen plotter.
This is something that I'm
also really inspired by.
And something that I've
experimented with as well.
So this is a project that is
using the mechanical pen plotter,
which is that device that
you can see in the top left.
And a mechanical pen plotter is basically
just a device that you send it commands,
movement commands, and
you attach a pen to the end of it.
And then it will move exactly
as you programmed it to move.
And so it's a really cool
way to take your code and
actually produce a physical output.
And the physical output is sort of,
it's robotic, and
it's exact and accurate because
it's clearly done by a robot, but
it has these sort of imperfections
where sometimes the pen
will dry up where the pinwheel
caption adds or something like that.
And so yeah, so inconvergent definitely
is one of the coders that sort of really
started this movement of using but
there have been coders in the 60s, and
a long time ago that have been doing the
same sort of stuff just in different ways.
So this isn't exactly new or
anything like that, but
it's one exciting way of bringing
your code into a physical space.
And then you can also create physical
installations with the same concepts that
we're talking about today.
So this is a really cool one, I thought,
just cuz it's so simple and so
fun and playful.
And, yeah, so it's basically,
I'll just skip forward a bit.
Basically you just pick up this ball,
and immediately the user or
the audience understands that
they're sort of holding the sun.
And on the left, the projected image
could very much be like a shader or
something, something that
we're gonna be talking about
later in the second part of the workshop.
And inside the ball, it could just be some
specific hardware that sends commands,
accelerometer data, or
something like that to the visual system.
And so, yeah, this is one
application of creative coding.
We can totally make these cool,
interactive experiences, sometimes for
museums or for galleries or
art installations, sometimes for events,
like parties or a fundraiser event for
a big company, and so on and so forth.
>> [MUSIC]
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And then this one
I thought was a nice one to talk about
as well.
This is more of a commercial work, so so
far I've been talking a lot
about artsy projects.
And you might get the sense that you can
only do artsy projects with this kind of
stuff but you can also really
apply this to commercial work.
This is a project by Active Theory, and
I think California they work out of.
And it's a WebGL project and
they partnered with Google basically.
Google was their client.
And so they created this experience where
you send a virtual airplane using your
phone, and you send it to this
sort of virtual 3D world.
It's using WebGL, it's using all the same
stuff we're gonna be talking about today.
And then they actually also
had at the launch party for
whatever the keynote was for Google.
They had everyone actually
interacting with the experience, and
so this is just to show that
it's not all about creating art.
If you wanted to make more of a living
out of it, there's a lot of commercial
applications as well for
brands, and so on and so forth.
And then, one last little thing would
be this company nervous system.
And I just wanted to
highlight them because, so
far, I've been talking
about digital experiences.
But, this is creating more
of a product with code.
And nervous system,
they create a lot of different things
like sometimes ceramics or jewelry or
items for your house, or puzzles in this
case, and quite often it's generative.
It's using sometimes inspired by natural
things, like differential growth,
just like inconvergent and Anders Hoff,
but applying it to 3D printing or CNC.
Or sort of injection moulding type stuff,
and
fabricating actual products out
of the code that they write.
And so that's just to say that creative
code doesn't need to be digital.
It could also be physical.
And there's a lot of
different applications.